GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: President
Obama's efforts to close tax
loopholes raise
hackles with U.S. corporations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Thursday: how
one town's embrace of refugees
is revitalizing
the local economy.
IBRAHIM ROSIC, Bosnian War
Refugee: I am not
a burden on the community. I am
not a burden
on social services. Yes,
community helped
me to get this, but now it's my
time to pay
back.
GWEN IFILL: And we talk to Anita
Hill, whose
testimony a quarter-century ago
against Justice
Clarence Thomas rocked the world
and inspired
a new film.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, the second
in our series
on Indian workers. We go to a
dusty desert
where mining conditions are
causing a deadly
lung disease.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The tone and
tensions grew
sharper today on the Democratic
side of the
presidential contest. It
happened as critical
new primaries loom in New York,
Pennsylvania
and other Northeastern states.
Bernie Sanders walked to the mic
this morning
in Philadelphia, and picked up
where he had
left off last night on Hillary
Clinton.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Are you qualified to be
president of the United
States when you're raising
millions of dollars
from Wall Street, an entity
who's greed, recklessness
and illegal behavior helped
destroy our economy?
JUDY WOODRUFF: During TV
interviews yesterday,
Clinton never actually called
Sanders unqualified,
but she did say this:
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I think he hasn't done his
homework,
and he'd been talking for more
than a year
about doing things that he
obviously hadn't
really studied or understood.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was a shot
at Sanders'
stumble in an interview on how
he'd break
up big banks.
Today, the Vermont senator
argued he had no
choice but to respond in kind.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: They're
going to question
my qualifications, I think I
have a right
to question theirs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this morning,
in New York
City, Clinton dismissed Sanders'
criticism,
and shifted back to the
Republicans.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Look, I
didn't -- I
don't know why he's saying that,
but I would
take Bernie Sanders over Donald
Trump or Ted
Cruz any time. So let's keep our
eye on what's
really at stake in this
election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans, too,
descended
on the EMPIRE STATE today. Texas
Senator Ted
Cruz was upstate, and focused on
the GOP front-runner
during a stop outside
Schenectady.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump has been supporting
liberal Democratic
politicians for 40 years.
When it comes to religious
liberty, when it
comes to the Supreme Court, he
said, Ted,
you got to learn to compromise.
You got to
learn to cut deals with the
Democrats and
go along to get along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump was
off the trail
today, as his campaign announced
it's beefing
up its delegate hunt. But, last
night, the
New York billionaire reached
back to a Cruz
jibe in January that Trump
symbolizes the
state's liberal politics.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Do you remember during the
debate when he
started lecturing me on New York
values like
we're no good, like we're no
good?
(BOOING)
DONALD TRUMP: And I started
talking to him
about the World Trade Center,
the bravery,
the incredible bravery of
everybody.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ohio Governor
John Kasich,
polling second to Trump in New
York, joined
in today with a new ad that rips
Cruz.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
They're not Iowa values and
they're not New
Hampshire values. Everyone knows
what New
York values are.
NARRATOR: Ted Cruz divides to
get a vote.
John Kasich unites to get things
done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former New York
City Mayor
Rudy Giuliani also criticized
Cruz today,
as he endorsed Trump.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: Russian
President Vladimir Putin is
denying he's tied
to offshore accounts, as
detailed in the Panama
Papers leak. In St. Petersburg
today, Putin
dismissed reports that a close
friend channeled
$2 billion to his supporters. He
said it's
part of a U.S.-led plot to
discredit Russia.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): More than anything,
our opponents
are concerned with the unity and
consolidation
of the Russian nation, of the
multinational
Russian people. Because of that,
attempts
are made to destabilize the
situation from
within, to make us more
agreeable and to shape
us the way they want.
GWEN IFILL: Putin himself is not
directly
named in any of the leaked
documents.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Syria, Islamic
State militants
abducted more than 300 workers
and contractors
today. State TV reported it
happened at a
cement plant about 28 miles from
Damascus.
GWEN IFILL: And in Iraq, elite
government
forces entered the center of a
key town held
by ISIS. They have been fighting
since last
month to retake Hit. It sits on
a major ISIS
supply route from Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iran's President
Hassan Rouhani
delivered a jab to his country's
hard-liners
today. In a televised speech, he
said that
his government favors -- quote
-- "a policy
of moderation" and he said Iran
must engage
with the world now to take
advantage of last
year's nuclear agreement.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian
President (through
translator): The opportunity the
nuclear deal
has created for us is not
permanent and eternal.
Opportunities pass like passing
clouds. If,
God forbid, a small group
succeed at not letting
us take advantage of this
opportunity, the
opportunity will not return.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Rouhani's remarks
are a challenge
to Iran's supreme leader,
Ayatollah Khamenei,
and his hard-line allies.
GWEN IFILL: Prosecutors in
Belgium have issued
a new appeal for help, finding a
ref -- a
fugitive, that is, from the
Brussels attacks.
They released new security
camera video today
showing the so-called man in the
hat as he
left the airport, walked away
and finally
disappeared. In all, 32 people
died in the
Brussels attacks. The Islamic
State claimed
responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
went back today
to where he once taught to press
his case
for Supreme Court nominee
Merrick Garland.
At the University of Chicago's
law school,
he argued the U.S. Senate has to
vote on Garland's
nomination, or risk sabotaging
the system.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We are going to see the kinds of
sharp partisan
polarization that have come to
characterize
our electoral politics seeping
entirely into
the judicial system. And the
courts will just
be an extension of our
legislatures.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans
insist that they
will wait for the next president
to name a
nominee. And the chair of the
Senate Judiciary
Committee, Chuck Grassley, said
today they're
committed to that stance.
SEN. CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa:
Our side
knows and our side believes that
what we're
doing is right. And when that's
the case,
it's not hard to withstand the
outrage and
the pressure they have
manufactured.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Garland met with
more Democratic
senators today. He's also met
with a handful
of Republicans.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street had a
tough day, as
sluggish growth hurt bank
stocks. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost
174 points to
close below 17542. The Nasdaq
fell 72 points,
and the S&P 500 slid 24.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a rare first
edition of
William Shakespeare's collected
plays has
turned up in Scotland. The
"First Folio" was
found at Mount Stuart, a vast
estate on the
Scottish Isle of Bute. It was
printed in 1623,
and is one of only 234 known
copies in the
world. Britain is this year
marking the 400th
anniversary of Shakespeare's
death in April
1616.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a crackdown
on companies seeking tax havens
overseas;
refugees' economic impact on a
city in Upstate
New York; the U.S. role in
Yemen's civil war;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The Obama
administration took
steps this week to rein in big
businesses
when it comes to taxes and
mergers.
First, the Treasury Department
issued tough
new rules that make it harder
for one company
merging with another to lower
its taxes by
taking a foreign address. The
president spoke
out against the so-called
inversions, saying
they lead to one of the most
insidious tax
loopholes.
A day later, the drug companies
Pfizer and
Allergan called off a $160
billion deal. Plus,
the Obama Justice Department is
trying to
block oil services giant
Halliburton from
merging with its rival Baker
Hughes. Other
proposed mergers may also be in
trouble.
Jim Tankersley writes about this
for The Washington
Post.
Welcome, Jim.
JIM TANKERSLEY, The Washington
Post: Thanks
for having me.
GWEN IFILL: So, give me a sense
of whether
this is a conscious strategic
use by the administration
on tax policy to crack down on
business.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Well, in this
particular case,
it's absolutely the
administration saying,
this is a practice in the
corporate world
that we don't like, and we're
going to use
tax policy to stop it. It looks
very tailored
in particular to mergers like
the Pfizer one,
which, I mean, it's very rare
that you see
a rule get announced on one day
and a merger
get called off the next, but
that's what they
have pulled off here.
GWEN IFILL: So, one of the
things that they
-- when we talk about this,
though, for instance,
the administration decided they
wanted to
make financial advisers more
accountable to
clients.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Is that part of that
same strategy,
or is that different?
JIM TANKERSLEY: I think what
we're seeing
are two things.
Over time, we have seen the
president sort
of shed his inhibitions about
taking positions
that might be opposed by the
business community.
He doesn't seem to really care
too much anymore
if he's being called
anti-business. So, we
see like sort of string of
decisions this
week that we have mentioned that
are all in
that vein.
And the business community has
howled, and
he hasn't really let that bother
him. Shorter
term, what we're seeing, though,
is the president,
I think, is thinking about his
legacy, and
he knows right now we're in a
time, a very
populist time, anti-corporate
time in the
America in the campaign.
And so by personally getting out
and announcing
details of the inversions rule,
making the
case for it, for example, this
week, he's
trying to cement that rule in
the public's
mind, so that the next president
doesn't change
it or walk it back.
GWEN IFILL: It does seem like
we're in a different
time when it comes to taking
shots at big
business, and that on both the
Republican
and the Democratic side of this
2016 campaign,
that seems to be more
acceptable.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Absolutely.
We're used to it, I think, to a
degree in
Democratic primaries for
president. The business
community tends to take a lot of
flak, and
then oftentimes candidates tack
a little more
toward a pro-business approach
in a general
election.
That's not entirely been true
this time. Both
Hillary Clinton and Bernie
Sanders especially
have been very populist. They
both talked
about corporate behavior, bad
behavior that
they want to see changed as
president. But
the big change is the Republican
side.
Donald Trump is talking about
things that
he doesn't -- companies being
unpatriotic
in moving jobs overseas. He's
talking down...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Hedge funds. He has
talked about
tax evasion for hedge fund
managers.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Yes.
So, it's this moment of anger.
It's the sense
for a lot of voters on both
sides of the aisle
that, hey, corporate America is
lining its
pockets, but I'm not getting
ahead. And whether
the policies that the candidates
are talking
about would actually, you know,
speak to that
problem or not, they are
definitely channeling
this moment of the politics, and
I think the
president is kind of
piggybacking on that
a little bit.
GWEN IFILL: Bernie Sanders, who
has probably
gone farther than any of the
candidates right
now in the race to hammering
away at this,
was scolded today by the
president of GE for
saying they were examples of --
I'm paraphrasing
here -- corporate greed.
What is the pushback coming from
the corporate
world?
JIM TANKERSLEY: Well, the
pushback, and part
of it is to say, hey, wait a
second, we create
a lot of jobs. We do a lot of
economic activity.
The GE op-ed which ran in my
newspaper basically
said, look, we have a big plant
in Vermont.
We'd love it if you visit, by
the way. You
have never done that. And we
create a lot
of good-paying jobs for people
of the type
you say you want to have happen.
So, don't
denigrate us just because we
have to try to
play by the rules like everybody
else with
taxes.
Now, the response to that, that
Bernie Sanders
and others have made is, these
are companies
that do a lot of things to try
to avoid paying
federal corporate income taxes
in particular,
and they don't -- or they move
production
overseas to find lower-cost
labor. And that
upset people who say, oh, you
should put America
first.
GWEN IFILL: Is the president or
the Justice
Department or the Obama
administration putting
their political -- their thumb
on the political
scale in this? There are some
who say, oh,
of course, they're on their way
out, so they're
destroying everything at it.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Well, I think
with the Justice
Department in particular, it's
hard to call
this political.
This would be -- when you talk
to neutral
observers of antitrust law, this
is an example
of -- this is a couple of very
big players
in an already consolidated
market that would,
you know, the Justice Department
believes,
push up prices for consumers if
they were
allowed to get a bunch of market
share together.
So, that's something that
Democrats and Republicans
have done. That's a power they
have exercised
as president. I'm not sure that
we can call
this a political move by Obama.
GWEN IFILL: And, Jim, is it
balanced out by
early administration moves to
bail out the
auto companies in Detroit, to
bail out -- "bail
out" Wall Street -- we use air
quotes.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Well, he
certainly -- yes,
the president certainly had his
moments of
working with business, and he
still does.
He's pushing the Trans-Pacific
Partnership
trade deal right now hand in
hand with the
Chamber and other groups of
business lobbyists.
So this is a president who in
the beginning
spent a lot of time trying to,
you know, help
the business community dig out
from the recession,
then has said a lot of things
about them being
fat cats or talking down Wall
Street bonuses
as bad.
And then took a lot of flak from
them, and
now has reached this moment
where he meets
them on a few things, he fights
them on some
others, and the political wind
is sort of
more with him maybe than with
them at the
moment.
GWEN IFILL: Well, it's
interesting to see.
The wind is definitely blowing
against them
at the moment, but we will see
what happens
next.
Jim Tankersley of The Washington
Post, thank
you very much.
JIM TANKERSLEY: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn to a
different story
at the intersection of jobs,
business and
politics, this on the question
of settling
and integrating refugees into
American communities.
Polls have shown concerns about
doing so among
a large percentage of voters.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the
story of one city in New York
state that continues
to offer a welcome mat, and sees
it as good
business.
It's part of his weekly series,
Making Sense,
which airs Thursdays.
PAUL SOLMAN: Post-industrial
Utica, New York,
Upstate, downtrodden, and, in
the heart of
downtown, where the United
Methodist Church
used to be, a thriving mosque.
In the world beyond Utica, the
tide of refugees
rises, the fear of foreigners
swells. Muslim
terrorists, real and imagined,
haunt us. Ted
Cruz calls for increased
policing of Muslim
neighborhoods.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Focus on communities where
radicalization
is a risk.
PAUL SOLMAN: Donald Trump's
first campaign
ad went further.
NARRATOR: The politicians can
pretend it's
something else, but Donald Trump
calls it
radical Islamic terrorism.
That's why he's
calling for a temporary shutdown
of Muslims
entering the United States until
we can figure
out what's going on.
PAUL SOLMAN: But when we asked
Utica Mayor
Robert Palmieri if the city
would be willing
to resettle Syrian refugees?
ROBERT PALMIERI, Mayor of Utica,
New York:
I would say, absolutely, we
would be, because
Utica starts with you. It's as
simple as that.
PAUL SOLMAN: There's the
humanitarian aspect,
of course, America's historic
promise to extend
a hand to huddled masses
yearning to breathe
free. But Utica likes the
economics.
ROBERT PALMIERI: They're willing
to work and
they work extremely hard. It's
the rebound
for our great city.
PAUL SOLMAN: Refugee
resettlement as an economic
development tool, a Rust Belt
revival strategy
Utica has pioneered. After
decades of decline
-- the city lost a third of its
population
when its factories closed --
Utica is growing
again, back up to 62,000 people,
thanks in
part to its reputation as --
quote -- "the
town that loves refugees," who
now make up
one out of every four residents.
Thousands are Muslims from
Bosnia, refugees
of the war there in the 1990s.
SAKIB DURACAK, Bosnian War
Refugee: We left
everything what we have at that
time and start
from zero again.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sakib Duracak, who
trained in
Bosnia as a construction
engineer, started
a small business in Utica
rehabbing cheap,
often crumbling, houses for
refugees looking
to build a new life.
SAKIB DURACAK: A huge
opportunity, because,
at the time when we came in
Utica, it's a
relatively, very dead and poor
city.
PAUL SOLMAN: Bosnians have
visibly spruced
up Utica's East Side and beyond.
But there's
an even more basic reason to
welcome refugees
to a town like Utica.
ELLEN KRALY, Colgate University:
To have an
economy, you have to have
workers, and you
have to have consumers.
PAUL SOLMAN: Professor Ellen
Kraly teaches
demography at nearby Colgate
University.
ELLEN KRALY: The influx of
refugees to Utica
allowed us to retain some
smaller industries
that were looking for highly
motivated labor.
PAUL SOLMAN: And if past
suffering helps fuel
motivation, Tha Da Paw has
plenty to spare.
THA DA PAW, Karen Refugee: I
work very hard
because I want to live American
life.
PAUL SOLMAN: An ethnic Karen, a
persecuted
minority in Burma, she spent 23
years starting
at age 4 in refugee camps in
Thailand. When
she was 14:
THA DA PAW: Burmese army, they
just shoot
our refugee camp and make it
burn. My sister's
best friend, she burn alive.
PAUL SOLMAN: A week later, her
17-year-old
sister committed suicide.
THA DA PAW: I think she tired of
life. Whole,
our life, we have to run, run,
run, run for
safety.
PAUL SOLMAN: Paw came to Utica
eight years
ago, worked as a nursing home
aide and housekeeper
while studying English, then as
a medical
interpreter. Three years ago,
she joined the
direct sales firm Mary Kay
Cosmetics. Within
months, she'd worked her way up
to the coveted
pink Cadillac.
THA DA PAW: I travel in Albany,
Buffalo. It's
really hard, but now I love to
live here.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, so we get why
refugees for
Utica, but why Utica for
refugees?
IBRAHIM ROSIC, Bosnian War
Refugee: Utica
was close to Syracuse, and Tom
Cruise is from
Syracuse, so I thought I was
going to see
Tom Cruise.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sadly, for Bosnian
refugee Ibrahim
Rosic, no cruise, happily, the
Mohawk Valley
Resource Center.
SHELLY CALLAHAN, Executive
Director, Mohawk
Valley Resource Center: We
receive $1,125
federal to be spent on behalf of
each arriving
refugee.
PAUL SOLMAN: With those dollars,
says executive
director Shelly Callahan, the
refugee center
rents an apartment, furnishes
it, gets the
utilities turned on, and starts
teaching the
basics.
SHELLY CALLAHAN: So, it's how to
lock your
door, how to work the stove, the
thermostat,
the plumbing.
PAUL SOLMAN: There are also
English lessons.
MAN: Is somebody sitting to the
left of you?
WOMAN: Left?
MAN: Yes.
WOMAN: Right?
MAN: Left, right.
WOMAN: You have got to shop
around.
PAUL SOLMAN: Introductions to
strange new
foods.
WOMAN: Celery. We're going to
make celery
and kale.
PAUL SOLMAN: And for those who
can drive,
the all-important class in
parking tickets,
a veritable auditorium of Babel.
But within
a few months, they're on their
own.
SHELLY CALLAHAN: They actually
come here owing
their airfare back to the
federal government.
So, they are expected to get a
job as soon
as possible.
PAUL SOLMAN: Although there are
no hard statistics
on how many refugees do or don't
find jobs
after their aid ends, some
qualify for public
assistance. Ibrahim Rosic was
literally torn
apart in the Bosnian conflict.
IBRAHIM ROSIC: In 1994 I stepped
on a land
mine. I lost my left leg, and my
right leg
was severely damaged. I have no
knee. I can't
bend it.
PAUL SOLMAN: He is officially
100 percent
disabled, but, says the former
engineer:
IBRAHIM ROSIC: I work two jobs.
I work full-time
as a director at Mohawk Valley
Community College,
and I also work as an adjunct
instructor at
SUNY Poly. I am not a burden on
the community.
I am not a burden on social
services. Yes,
community helped me to get this,
but now it's
my time to pay back. And I would
say most
refugees do the same.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, are refugees
the economic
boon that motivated immigrants
famously have
been?
Yes, says economist Jeffrey
Sachs, but there
are negatives.
JEFFREY SACHS, Columbia
University: Some workers
face increased job competition
and their wages
can be driven down. If
lower-skilled immigrants
come, then lower-skilled
American workers
may see a decline in their
wages, whereas
business owners may see more
workers at lower
cost for them.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what if, as
many Americans
fear, even just a few are
terrorists?
Shelly Callahan's response? This
isn't Europe.
SHELLY CALLAHAN: Refugees are
the most intensively
screened immigrants really to
come to this
country, about two years of
intense scrutiny
by the Department of Homeland
Security, the
FBI, ICE, Department of State.
There's DNA
testing involved.
YOUSIF AL SAAD, Iraq War
Refugee: For those
people who is proven as bad
people, we don't
want them here.
PAUL SOLMAN: The Al Saad family,
Palestinians
who for decades lived in
Baghdad, fled during
the troop surge of 2007, the
deadliest year
of the Iraq War.
YOUSIF AL SAAD: I got kidnapped
there by,
I don't know, some militia.
WOMAN: One of my other brothers,
too.
YOUSIF AL SAAD: My other
brother.
WOMAN: They beat him up.
YOUSIF AL SAAD: He got beat up.
I lost many
friends of mine.
PAUL SOLMAN: They spent three
years in a camp
on the Syrian border, before
being cleared
for transit to the United
States.
Yousif Al Saad went to work at
the Chobani
yogurt plant outside Utica,
whose CEO, Hamdi
Ulukaya, has championed the
rights of refugees
and hired hundreds of them. We
were supposed
to tape there, but at the last
minute, Chobani
pulled out, citing security
concerns, fear
for the safety of employees in
the current
political environment.
SHELLY CALLAHAN: Well, I think
that is probably
reflective of the very sad
climate in this
country with regard to politics
at the moment
and rhetoric.
MEN AND WOMEN: With liberty and
justice for
all.
MAN: Let's have a round of
applause for our
new citizens.
(APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: A few weeks ago in
Utica, Yousif
Al Saad joined 29 others, from
15 different
countries in becoming a U.S.
citizen.
WOMAN: Congratulations. Your new
flag.
PAUL SOLMAN: Almost all were
refugees.
We leave the last word to Judge
David Peebles.
JUDGE DAVID PEEBLES, New York:
America is
now your country. I cannot
overemphasize the
need now, more than ever, for
you and your
fellow citizens to unite, answer
the call
and assist in bettering our
society and our
world. Congratulations on
becoming a citizen
of the greatest nation on earth.
God bless
all of you and God bless
America.
(APPLAUSE)
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new movie about
Anita Hill's sexual harassment
charges against
Justice Clarence Thomas; the
harsh conditions
facing India's rural work force;
and model
Padma Lakshmi on using her fame
to do good.
But, first, the grinding war in
Yemen has
further broken an already
failing state. Now
there are new questions about
the depth of
U.S. involvement there, aiding
what has become
a proxy war.
Saudi Arabia and its Sunni
allies launched
the air campaign 13 months ago,
aimed at Shiite
Houthi rebels in league with
Iran. But the
United Nations estimates the
airstrikes account
for 60 percent of the 3,200
civilians killed
in the conflict so far.
Just last month, an air raid on
a crowded
market left 119 people dead.
RUPERT COLVILLE, Spokesman,
United Nations
High Commissioner for Human
Rights: Despite
public promises to investigate
such incidents,
we have yet to see progress in
any such investigations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now Human Rights
Watch says
its investigators visited the
site, and determined
the strikes used U.S.-supplied
bombs. The
group said it illustrates --
quote -- "tragically,
why countries should stop
selling arms to
Saudi Arabia."
In response, the U.S. Central
Command said:
"Selection and final vetting of
targets in
the campaign are made by the
Saudi-led coalition,
not the United States."
Secretary of State John Kerry
said he didn't
have any -- quote -- "solid
information" about
what weapons were used. He spoke
during a
visit to Bahrain, a member of
the Saudi coalition.
The U.S. aids that coalition,
and in November
approved a nearly $1.3 billion
rearming program
for the Saudis. "Foreign Policy"
magazine
reports that there have been
roughly 750 U.S.
aerial refueling missions.
Meanwhile, a cease-fire is
scheduled to begin
Sunday, with new peace talks
scheduled for
April 18.
For more on the conflict and the
U.S. role
in Yemen, I'm joined now by
retired Army Colonel
Derek Harvey. He was an
intelligence officer
and special adviser to the
commander of U.S.
forces in Iraq, General David
Petraeus.
Colonel Harvey, thank you for
being with us
again.
This report by Human Rights
Watch is disturbing,
but hasn't it been known for
some time that
there have been large numbers of
civilian
casualties in this war?
COL. DEREK HARVEY (RET.), U.S.
Army: Yes,
it's been true that large
numbers of civilian
casualties.
And I think it's inevitable,
given the skill
and lack of training and use of
the weapons
and technology that the Saudi
air forces employ
in Yemen today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what do you
mean by that?
What do you mean by lack of
training and skill,
or lack of skill?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Well, Judy, I
think we
are very accustomed in America
and elsewhere
in the world to the high
professionalism and
great skill of the U.S. Air
Force and Western
European countries, who have
rules of engagement,
training, and capabilities that
allow them
to reduce collateral damage and
civilian casualties.
Other countries around the
world, to include
the Saudi Arabian air force,
doesn't have
that same level of skill. They
fly higher.
They're not as good at employing
those weapons.
They, you know, are probably
trying to avoid
civilian casualties. Everything
we see seems
to suggest that. But it's
inevitable, given
the type of conflict and the
skill level of
those that are involved in this
conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why did the U.S.,
why did this
administration decide to provide
this kind
of military support to the
Saudis and to this
coalition, intelligence,
refueling, and all
the rest?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Well, part of
it is, we
have been attempting to bolster
the relationship
with Saudi Arabia after some of
the fractious
disagreement about the Iran
nuclear deal,
and concerns in Saudi Arabia and
in the Gulf
about Iranian continued efforts
to encroach
on Sunni Arab areas.
And with the successes of Iran
in Iraq and
in Syria and Lebanon, they saw
this as another
threat from Iran supporting the
Shia-aligned
Houthis in Yemen that was going
to threaten
Saudi Arabia. The United States
simply decided
it was best to pollster and
repair that relationship
with Riyadh and support them in
the way that
we have been doing it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what -- I
mean, can you
spell out a little bit more
about what the
support entails?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Clearly, we
are providing
some advice and assistance with
limited what
I would call coaching. But we're
not selecting
or directing the operations or
directing any
targeting.
There is intelligence that's
being provided
from a range of U.S.
intelligence capabilities,
to include drones that are
flying over Yemen
on a regular basis. The air
refueling that
was commented on in the intro
piece is -- has
been an important element.
But, mostly, the Saudi Arabians
and the other
Gulf countries that are involved
in this conflict
primarily use U.S. weapons and
munitions.
And, inevitably, it's going to
be American-sourced
equipment, weapons and munitions
that will
be used in Yemen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how much
responsibility
does the United States bear for
these civilian
casualties?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Well, I don't
think we're
involved in selecting any of
those targets.
It's indirect.
We have been supporting an ally,
and, in that
sense, you know, there is some
responsibility.
The United States
administration, the Obama
administration, Secretary Kerry
and others,
have distanced themselves very
clearly from
that conflict and are
recognizing that it's
really about supporting Saudi
Arabia and repairing
the relationship.
So, they understand that they're
in a hard
place because of the blowback
and the concerns
that the United States is being
tainted by
the support of the Saudi
Arabians in this
conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But do you -- is
it your sense
that the administration has
explained the
conflict here, the contradiction
here?
COL. DEREK HARVEY: No, not at
all.
This is another war that is
forgotten. It's
on the back burner. It's, in
part, part of
our larger C.T. strategy that
imploded almost
a year ago in Yemen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Counterterrorism.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Yes, our
counterterrorism
strategy.
And, unfortunately, since the
civil war expanded
and the Saudis became involved,
our ability
to go after al-Qaida and the
expanding Islamic
State elements in Yemen has been
hurt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it sounds as
if the prospects
for working this out are --
remain very difficult.
There's a cease-fire and peace
talks, but
no assurances.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: I think we're
just at the
beginning of that journey. The
talks that
are coming up in Kuwait City
mid-month are
a good step.
There has been some exchanges of
prisoners.
There's talk on both sides. But
we're a long
ways away from exhaustion on
both sides or
one side being able to impose
its will on
the other. So I think this
conflict is going
to rage on. And there's really,
you know,
bleak prospects.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Colonel Derek
Harvey, we thank
you very much.
COL. DEREK HARVEY: Thank you,
Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Twenty-five years
ago this October,
University of Oklahoma law
Professor Anita
Hill changed Supreme Court
confirmation hearings
forever. Twenty million
households tuned in
to see her testify that her
former boss, nominee
Clarence Thomas, sexually
harassed her.
The hearings continued through
the weekend,
touching hot buttons of sex,
power and race.
Thomas called it a high-tech
lynching.
HBO Films retells the story in
"Confirmation,"
starring Kerry Washington and
Wendell Pierce
as Thomas.
ACTOR: If what you say this man
said to you
occurred, why in God's name,
when he left
his position of power or status
or authority
over you, why in God's name
would you ever
speak to a man like that the
rest of your
life?
KERRY WASHINGTON, Actress:
That's a very good
question. And I am sure that I
cannot answer
it to your satisfaction. I have
suggested
that I was afraid of
retaliation. I was afraid
of damage to my professional
life.
I believed that -- you have to
understand
that this kind of response is
not atypical,
and I can't explain it. It takes
an expert
in psychology to explain how
that can happen.
But it can happen, because it
happened to
me.
GWEN IFILL: Anita Hill, now a
professor of
law at Brandeis University,
joins me now.
You said you watched this film
about a week
ago. Did you hesitate at all to
relive that
again?
ANITA HILL, Professor of Law,
Brandeis University:
Well, I have relived it on other
occasions,
and so this wasn't the first
time.
There was a documentary a couple
of years
ago.
GWEN IFILL: It was called
"Anita."
ANITA HILL: It was called
And it's still hard, but I -- I
know it's
important, and it's something
that I was willing
to do, because I really wanted
to know how
HBO of going to tell the story.
GWEN IFILL: You know, you have
lived in this
your entire -- the past
quarter-of-a-century.
Many people are just coming new
to the story
or remember it vaguely. Do you
look back on
it and think, I would do this
again?
ANITA HILL: I would do it again.
Many people do remember it
vaguely, but I
run into people all the time who
remember
it vividly. As a matter of fact,
when I was
on the flight here this morning
from Boston,
a woman -- I said, "Boy, you
really have a
good memory."
And she says: "I remember it so
well. It was
like it just happened."
GWEN IFILL: You accumulated
labels during
this process. You were either a
liar in some
people's eyes or a truth-teller.
Do you worry that you will never
be able to
shed those labels?
ANITA HILL: I don't worry about
it. I just
keep living my life.
It's been 25 years. There are
just people
who don't know the story.
GWEN IFILL: People who weren't
born.
ANITA HILL: People who weren't
born, don't
know the story.
And I think they're going to
find it really
interesting. In some ways, it is
going to
seem like ancient history to
them, but I think,
in many ways, it is going to
seem just like
today, because some of the
issues that were
raised, as you pointed out in
the introduction,
are so contemporary. They
haven't gone away.
GWEN IFILL: I'm old enough to
have remembered
the hearings at the time. And I
was shocked
then. I am shocked now, reliving
it and watching
the things that were said, the
different characters
that different senators and
others took on.
And I wonder if it is surreal
for you, too.
ANITA HILL: It was surreal to
experience that.
And, unfortunately, I hear from
women in particular,
but women and men, who come up
against this
kind of power and this kind of
resistance
all the time. And,
unfortunately, they're
getting some of the same kinds
of inaccurate
statements, some of the
fallacies, some of
the myths that were behind what
the senators
were doing are being repeated
over and over
again.
GWEN IFILL: Have you talked to
Kerry Washington
about her playing you?
ANITA HILL: She and I spoke when
she was preparing
to play me. And she works very
hard to understand
the person.
And I have a lot of respect for
that. I was
actually comforted by it and
thought, OK,
well, if hard work is what it
takes and skill,
she -- she's going to pull it
off very nicely.
GWEN IFILL: And this movie
captures, you were
personally -- your character was
dragged through
the mud. I'm sure Clarence
Thomas would say
his was as well.
But I wonder if you have spoken
with any of
the senators who were on that
committee since.
ANITA HILL: I have not spoken
with them.
GWEN IFILL: Have they reached
out to you?
ANITA HILL: Arlen Specter did at
one point.
He suggested that we -- what he
said was,
"I was thinking we might be able
to work on
something together."
But I just couldn't see that as
a possibility.
GWEN IFILL: How do young women
react to you
now? You're on a college campus.
College campuses
are hotbeds of debate for things
-- among
other things, sexual assault
cases now.
ANITA HILL: Sexual harassment
and sexual assault
really is something that is on
the minds of
young women today.
I do visit -- I'm on a college
campus. We're
grappling with those issues. I
visit colleges
all over the country.
High-profile colleges
like Berkeley, U.C. Berkeley,
are grappling
with them, making decisions, in
some cases,
that are just wrongheaded
decisions about
how to proceed with sexual
harassment claims.
There are two that are out there
now, one
involving an administrator, the
other involving
a high-profile faculty member.
And so these
issues are very present. And I
have to credit
some very, very brave young
women and men
for taking this on, on college
campuses.
GWEN IFILL: One of the things
that also crossed
my mind while I was watching
this is whether
you could have survived, whether
this, any
of this set of events could have
unfolded
in our current age in a time of
instantaneous
social media and Twitter and
instant judgment?
ANITA HILL: I don't upon how any
of -- how
this would unfold today in this
environment.
But I can tell you a funny
story. One of the
things that I tell to people is,
I have a
collection of faxes that I got.
Well, we wouldn't
have faxes. We didn't even have
e-mail so
much. Western Union, I think,
fell under the
crunch of the telegrams that
were coming.
It would be quite different
today. But I don't
-- I think that the issues are
such that it
wouldn't go away. It wouldn't be
instant.
I think it would be different.
The forums
for discussing it would be
different, but
the issue wouldn't disappear
just because
we live in an instant society.
GWEN IFILL: When -- at one point
in the film,
the character, and presumably
you, said, this
was a mistake. Do you still
think it was a
mistake? And, if not what,
changed your mind?
ANITA HILL: I think the
character -- my words
aren't always exactly what the
characters
are saying.
You know, that's the thing about
fictional
adaptations.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
ANITA HILL: I don't think it was
a mistake.
I think it was something that
was meant to
happen, actually. I had
something to say.
I had an experience to share
that went to
the fitness of an individual who
was going
to be sitting on a Supreme Court
with a lifetime
appointment. It was important,
not only to
the integrity of this
individual, but also
to the integrity of the court
itself.
And as a member of the bar, as a
citizen,
I had a right to come forward
and to testify.
I don't think we -- that is ever
a mistake.
And I really wouldn't do it
differently today.
GWEN IFILL: Anita Hill,
professor of law at
Brandeis University, thank you
very much.
ANITA HILL: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: HBO's "Confirmation"
premieres
Saturday, April 16, at 8:00 p.m.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday,
special correspondent
Fred de Sam Lazaro brought us a
report on
how big city street vendors are
being left
behind in India's booming
economy.
Today, we travel to stone
quarries in the
rural northern part of the
country, where
a deadly disease has trapped
workers there
in poverty for generations.
This report is part of our
Agents for Change
series.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Across the
urban landscape
rise majestic sandstone palaces,
monuments
and temples, built in India's
timeless architectural
traditions.
But what's also timeless is how
the stone
continues to be mined, far from
the cities
here in the Rajasthan Desert.
Early each morning,
you hear the sound of sandstone
being pounded
into a gravel that is used in
construction.
No one is spared the drudgery,
it seems, nursing
mother with infant, young
children.
QUESTION: How old are you?
CHILD (through translator): Ten.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He should be
in school.
It's the law. But history
suggests he will
soon graduate to a quarry, part
of a vicious
cycle of generational poverty
and disease.
The work is physically brutal
under a blazing
desert sun. Power drills are a
recent addition
that have made these quarries
more productive.
But behind their thick clouds of
dust, miners
wear nothing but flip-flops on
their feet-and
nothing at all on their faces.
They earn $2
to $4 a day, depending on the
task.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI, Executive
Director, GRAVIS:
The law of the mines is that, no
work, no
wage. So, the days when they
can't turn to
work, because of an illness or
because of
some other problem, they can't
make any money.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And, Prakash
Tyagi says,
for an alarming number, perhaps
a third of
the 250,000 sandstone miners,
the work is
lethal, linked to silicosis, a
slow, irreversible
loss of lung function.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: Silicosis is
a shame. Silicosis
is something that shouldn't
exist in the contemporary
times.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Silicosis is
easily preventable
with face masks and by using
water to tamp
down the dust that is
everywhere. And the
disease is now rarely seen in
developed countries.
And yet Tyagi, who is a medical
doctor, says
no one around here had ever
addressed until
about three decades ago, when
his late father
started a charity called GRAVIS,
dedicated
to improving life in this
impoverished region.
In the early days, many patients
they saw
were assumed to have
tuberculosis, which is
treatable with antibiotics.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: The treatment
was given.
Still, people were dying with
lung issues
very similar to T.B. But it
wasn't T.B.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Only after
sending 250
X-rays to a research center in
Delhi did GRAVIS
learn it was dealing with
silicosis and designed
ways to help patient cope with
the slow, degenerative,
fatal condition.
Today, GRAVIS runs field clinics
near quarries,
offering diagnostic services and
a limited
amount of drugs, like cough
suppressants and
inhalers that can control,
though not cure,
symptoms.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI (through
translator): Do
you have T.B.?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many, like
this 25-year-old
mother of two, hope that they
just have T.B.,
which is a common coinfection.
However, the paper she carried,
but was unable
to read, indicated she had
silicosis.
She may live to be 40 years old?
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: At the most.
So, she's
one of those accelerated
silicosis cases.
She is saying that she has been
working in
mines for about eight to 10
years. She would
have started when she was 15 or
16.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many start
even younger,
though it typically takes about
20 years of
dust exposure for silicosis to
develop, destroying
lung tissue, rendering sufferers
listless
and unable to do much physical
activity.
MAN (through translator): I have
been ill
for about seven years. For two
years I have
just haven't been able to work
at all.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Their
condition will worsen
inevitably, until, like Joga Ram
(ph), they
are literally unable to breathe.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: This is how,
typically,
silicosis patients die.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Is he
reasonably comfortable
or is he in pain?
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: He's in a lot
of pain.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ideally, he
would receive
oxygen and steroids and die in a
hospital
or hospice setting. None of that
is available
or affordable here.
The prolonged illness forces
many families
to incur debt, prolonging their
medieval poverty
into the next generation.
Modu Devi (ph) echoed the
sentiments of many
in this group of silicosis
widows.
WOMAN (through translator): We
have to send
our children to work. We have no
choice. There
is no other way to put food in
our stomachs.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It's not a
lot of food.
It was around 10:00 a.m. when we
visited this
village.
"What have you eaten?" I asked.
They hadn't.
"The truck will come by around
midday and,
only when we load it up, will we
get the money
to buy food," she said.
QUESTION (through translator):
How much will
you get paid?
WOMAN (through translator): One
hundred and
fifty.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That's about
$2.50.
These magnificent sandstone from
which government
officials governs in New Delhi
may seem aloof
and far removed from the
suffering and labor
of miners in Rajasthan. But the
irony is that
India actually passed laws
decades ago to
protect minors.
There's a wide gap between
what's on paper
and the ground reality. The
combination of
official neglect, social
indifference and
poor education ensure laws are
rarely enforced.
This mine owner insisted that he
makes masks
and helmets available.
MAN (through translator): They
just don't
wear them. They don't like to
wear them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: "Why not
require them?"
I asked.
"They will just leave and go to
the next mine,"
he said.
For their part, workers said
they sometimes
used masks while drilling, but
in the blazing
hot weather, they said, they are
suffocating.
MAN (through translator): It's
impossible
to breathe in them. We cannot
breathe when
we wear them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A few mines
now do provide
for wet drilling and require
workers to wear
masks on certain jobs. This mine
is run by
Jeevraj Meghwal, who won a land
concession
under affirmative action
policies to help
people from lower castes.
JEEVRAJ MEGHWAL, Quarry Owner
(through translator):
I was once a laborer myself, so
I know about
the difficulties when you get
sick, when you
lose your income. In the
beginning, we didn't
know much about silicosis.
GRAVIS did help
us understand it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: GRAVIS,
which is funded
by charitable donations from
abroad and some
Indian government grants, also
helps affected
miners navigate the daunting
government bureaucracy.
DR. PRAKASH TYAGI: There is a
lot of paperwork.
There is a lot of delay. But we
try to make
sure that these people who are
illiterate
and less capable go through
those hurdles.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
compensation, about
1,700 U.S. dollars for living
victims, $3,000
for their survivors, provides
some debt relief,
more money to travel and perhaps
find new
work.
But Tyagi says his and a few
other groups
meet only a small fraction of
the need, while
he says thousands of silicosis
victims scattered
across this remote region suffer
and die each
year without even a diagnosis.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Rajasthan, India.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.
You can watch his previous story
about India's
urban workers on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Padma Lakshmi is
perhaps best
recognized as the host of
Bravo's "Top Chef."
Tonight, she speaks about using
her public
platform to shine light on
causes that matter.
Lakshmi's memoir, "Love, Loss,
and What We
Ate," was released on
International Women's
Day.
PADMA LAKSHMI, Author, "Love,
Loss, and What
We Ate": Somebody approached me
at a bar one
night who was a friend of a
friend and thought
I could model. And, at the time,
you know,
with sort of youthful arrogance,
I said, oh,
I am not going to ruin my GPA in
the last
semester.
I have a very complicated and
layered relationship
with modeling. It has allowed me
to travel,
allowed me to see the world. I
did feel guilty
about it. You know, I made in
one day what
it took my mother, for example,
as a nurse
to make in a month.
I know that my looks are really
the alchemy
of my parents' genetics and have
little to
do with me or any accomplishment
of my own.
Food and fashion are both much
closer than
people realize. You can tell a
lot about a
culture by the way they eat and
by the way
they dress. People would say,
well, what does
a model know about food? But the
truth is,
models eat a lot. They're just
these freaks
of nature who are very young and
have great
metabolisms. And that is the
truth.
One of the biggest fringe
benefits of having
a measure of success and being
in the public
eye is being able to do
something good for
other people.
I think the proudest moment for
my family,
who are all Indian, wasn't when
"Top Chef"
won the Emmy or when I was on
the cover of
"Vogue." It was the day that I
spoke at MIT
and gave the keynote address.
My foundation, the Endometriosis
Foundation
of America, was launching the
first research
center for gynepathology.
Endometriosis affects
a woman not only physically, but
emotionally
and mentally, because she's in
chronic pain.
It's something that I have
suffered from all
my life, and it was a silent and
deadly shadow.
There's no cure for
endometriosis, but there
is certainly very good treatment
out there.
And if you find it early in a
young girl's
life, you can change her life
forever.
If I had had surgery at 21 or 25
or even 30,
rather than 36 or 37, when I
first had it,
my life would have been
different. I would
have gotten 25 percent of my
life back, 25
percent of my life to go to
football games,
help my mom in the kitchen,
study for midterms,
be a normal human being.
And I don't want anyone else to
go through
that ever if they don't have to.
I'm Padma Lakshmi, and this is
my Brief But
Spectacular take on food,
travel, and celebrating
all things female.
GWEN IFILL: You can find more
videos in our
Brief But Spectacular series on
our Facebook
page, Facebook.com/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a
clarification to a story
we reported at the top of
tonight's broadcast.
We said that former New York
City Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani is endorsing Donald
Trump in the
New York primary. That is
incorrect. Mr. Giuliani
says he's voting for Mr. Trump,
but he's not
endorsing him.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Meet Lupe and Jacqueline,
both born in
Mexico and brought to the U.S.
as small children
without documents. They have a
lot in common,
but, today, these students face
very different
paths because of where they
live. Learn how
educational opportunities differ
for undocumented
immigrants in different states.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in later
tonight on
"Charlie Rose" for an interview
with Democratic
presidential candidate Bernie
Sanders.
GWEN IFILL: A note before we go.
I'm going to be off the air for
a few weeks.
But my friend and partner, Judy
Woodruff,
here will be holding down the
fort until I
return.
I'll see you then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we already
can't wait for
you to come back.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, we will look at
Alabama's efforts
to reduce its prison population.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
END